{{#pagetitle:Contribute translations}} [[Main Page]] > [[Resources]] >
Resources/Translation

Thank you for your interest in contributing user interface translations to the
AtoM project! Your contributions help to make AtoM a multilingual application
with a global reach.

In our continuing efforts to make the process of translating the AtoM interface
more efficient, Artefactual Systems has moved from its previous translation
service, [https://www.transifex.com/ Transifex] to [https://www.weblate.org/
Weblate], an open source web-based translation management system supporting
continuous translation from multiple sources. More than one translator can
contribute translated strings, making the process faster and easier, and
enabling Artefactual Systems to publish translations more often.  Everything is
web-based using Weblate, meaning you can access your translation work via any
web browser, instead of having to handle [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XLIFF
XLIFF] files directly, as was the case with early versions of ICA-AtoM
translations.

This page will introduce you to the AtoM Weblate project, so that you can sign
up and begin contributing translations. If you have contributed through
Transifex in the past, you will been to open a new account with Weblate to
continue contributing.

<admonition type="seealso"> * Interested in contributing to our project
documentation? We have a separate page for that! See:
[[Resources/Documentation/Contribute|Contribute documentation]] * Looking to
contribute code to AtoM? See: [[Development/Contribute code|Contribute code]] *
Check out our [https://www.accesstomemory.org/docs User Manual] for information
on how to translate content or interface elements locally (in your installation
only) - see the Multilingual section.  </admonition>

'''You can see the AtoM project in Weblate here:''' https://www.XXXXXXXXXXXX/


__TOC__



===Sign up for an account with Weblate===

'''1.''' Navigate to https://www.XXXXXXXXXXXX/

[[File:weblate-signup.png|thumb|500px|center|Sign-up page for Weblate]]


'''2.''' Fill in all the required fields, click on “Register” (note: by
doing so you are agreeing with Weblate to use your name and email in version
control commits and provide your contribution under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Share Alike 4.0 (CC-BY-SA-4.0) license that applies to AtoM
documentation). Weblate also supports several third-party registrations and
provides links from their registration page.

[[File:weblste-3rd-party-registration.png|thumb|500px|center|Third party
registration options for Weblate]]

You will be sent an activitation email. Once you have activated your account,
you will be ready to continue with the next step.

<admonition type="seealso"> Weblate has its own help documentation - here's a
help page on getting started: *
[https://docs.weblate.org/en/latest/user/index.html Weblate Documentation - Translators guide] </admonition>

===Join the AtoM Project===

'''3.''' Once you have activated your account, you will be redirected to a page
that asks you to agree to Weblate's Terms of Service. Once you have done so, a
second page will prompt you to set a password. Following this you will be
directed to the main page where you can choose your preferred language(s) for
translation and set other preferences.

'''4.''' On the second configuration page, you will be given the option to start
your own project or to join an existing one. Select "Join an existing project".

[[File:transifex-find-projects.png|thumb|500px|center|Configuration page for
Transifex. Click the "Find projects" button after inputting your preferences and
languages]]

'''5.''' The last configuration page will ask you to identify languages that you
speak. Select as many as are applicable and click on "Get started".

'''6.''' A pop-up window will appear. After you click on "Find a project to
translate", type "atom" into the search bar and then click on the AtoM project
when it appears below.

[[File:transifex-find-atom.png|thumb|500px|center|Project finder for Transifex.
Type "atom" into the search bar and then select the AtoM project]]

'''7.''' You will be redirected to the
[https://www.transifex.com/artefactual/atom/ AtoM Transifex Project homepage].

[[File:transifex-atom.png|thumb|500px|center|The AtoM project homepage in
Transifex]]

===Join a team===

'''8.''' In the top right corner of the page, select "Join team".

[[File:transifex-join-team.png|thumb|500px|center|Joining a team in the AtoM
Transifex project]]

'''9.''' A pop-up will appear with a list of the available languages. Select
your chosen translation language from the list. When you've found it, click the
Submit button (if you wish to translate AtoM into multiple languages, you can
repeat this process again later).

<admonition type="important"> Please review the options available in the list
prior to requesting a new language! In many cases, we have had requests for
different locales (for example, requesting "fr_FR" for France French, instead of
working in the existing "fr" French project), but AtoM does not always support
these very well. If at all possible, please work within the existing projects,
or try to select the most generic option, without locale codes. We'll work with
you if there are no other options, of course - but if you can avoid using a
specific locale, it will make merging and maintaining your translations in AtoM
much easier!  </admonition>

[[File:transifex-select-language.png|thumb|500px|center|Selecting a language in
the AtoM Transifex project]]

'''10.''' You will see a confirmation message informing you that your request
has been submitted. One of the Artefactual project maintainers will review the
request and approve your account.

'''11.''' You will receive an automated email from Transifex introducing you to
the translation editor interface and providing you with a link to generic help
instructions. You may review these instructions if you wish, or follow the
specific instructions that the AtoM coordinators have provided below.

<admonition type="seealso"> Here are the links that Transifex will provide you
with in the email, for reference: *
[http://docs.transifex.com/tutorials/txeditor/ Translating and reviewing content
in the Transifex Editor] * [http://docs.transifex.com/ Transifex Help
documentation] </admonition>

'''12.''' Once your account is approved by the AtoM coordinators, you will
receive an email notification from Transifex. It will indicate that you have
been accepted to the team of the language of your choice within the AtoM
project. Once you've received this email, return to the AtoM Project homepage in
Transifex (https://www.transifex.com/artefactual/atom/dashboard/).

'''13.''' Click on the blue Translate button to start translating. Follow the
on-screen prompts to select your language and the resource that you would like
to translate.

[[File:transifex-translate-now.png|thumb|500px|center|Follow the directions to
begin translating.]]

'''14.''' You will be taken to a page containing the current translated strings
in that project for your chosen language. This is the Translation Editor.

<admonition type="tip"> Want to work translating multiple languages at once?
Repeat steps 8-15 above. When you work with the Translation Editor, you will
then be able to switch easily between languages.  </admonition>

===Use the Translation Editor===

You are now in the Editor screen. If you are a translator for more than one
language/ team you can switch between the available languages using the language
drop-down menu at the top left side of the screen.

Here's what the Translation Editor interface looks like - we've added some
numbered orange circles to the image to point out different parts of the
interface, which will be explained below.

[[File:transifex-translation-interface.png|thumb|800px|center|The Transifex
Editor web interface]]

<admonition type="seealso"> Transifex documentation: *
[http://docs.transifex.com/tutorials/txeditor/ Translating and reviewing content
in the Transifex Editor] * [http://docs.transifex.com/introduction/translators/
Getting started as a Translator] </admonition>

'''( 1 ) The language drop-down'''

This is where you can see what language you are currently working in. If you are
working on translating AtoM into multiple languages (e.g. you have followed the
steps above one time for each language, and have been added to the language
teams), then you can also use this language drop-down to switch quickly between
languages.

'''( 2 ) Navigation panel - source strings'''

The left-hand column of the page is the Navigation panel. It shows all the
original source (English) strings to be translated on the farthest left. You can
use the search bar above to search for a specific translation string
(translation text keyword search), or you can search by a number of other
filters, such as translated date (for strings that have already been
translated), comments, etc.

[[File:transifex-search-bar.png|thumb|600px|center|The Transifex Editor's search
bar, searching for specific text in the source strings]]

You can also filter the source strings in the Navigation panel to show only
those strings that have not yet been translated, using the buttons described in
'''( 4 )''', below.

To translate a string, click on a source string in the navigation panel, and
then perform your translation work in the middle column, the Translation panel
described in '''( 5 )''', below.

'''( 3 ) Navigation panel - translated strings'''

Whenever content has already been translated by you or another Transifex user in
your team, it will appear in grey to the right of the original source strings.
You can re-edit translated content at any time by selecting a specific string,
and then editing the existing translation using the middle column Translation
panel, described in '''( 5 )''', below.

'''( 4 ) Navigation filters'''

These tabs allow you to quickly filter the content displayed in the left-hand
column, the Navigation panel (described above). For example, you can use the
middle filter to limit content in the Navigation panel so it displays only those
strings that have not yet been translated. These tabs also offer you a measure
of your team's progress - how many total strings there are, and how many have
already been translated. If you have a team reviewer, you can also see at a
glance how many strings have yet to be reviewed.

<admonition type="tip"> Note as well that to the far right of the Navigation
filters there is a progress bar, indicating how much of the source strings you
have translated as a green progress indicator filling up the grey bar. If you
hover this progress bar you can see further details.
[[File:transifex-progress-bar.png|thumb|600px|center|The Transifex Editor's
progress bar]] </admonition>

'''( 5 ) Translation panel'''

The middle column on the page is where you will do the actual translation work.
To start translating, you will first need to select a source string from the
Navigation panel on the left (described above).

The Translation panel is divided into 3 main sections. On the top is the source
box, which contains the original source string you have selected in the
Navigation panel on the left. In the middle is the translation box, where you
can type in your translation of the source string. If the string is already
translated, this box is filled in with the last translation, and the soure box
will display in light grey the name of the user who last translated the string,
and when. You can still make edits to the current translation if desired -
simply click your cursor into the middle translation box, make your corrections,
and click "Save." The bottom  of the Translation panel holds the context box,
which includes some automated contextual information about the current string.

<admonition type="important"> Don't forget to click the Save button after you
have entered a translation!  If you navigate to another source string, the
translation stays in draft mode for as long as the editor is open and you are
navigating on the same resource and translation language. If you save the
translation before navigating to another source string, the translation is
saved. There is a "Save all" button that will save all draft translations you've
entered at once - but if you close the editor without saving your work, it will
be lost!  </admonition>

'''( 6 ) Collaboration panel'''

The column on the right-hand side of the Transifex Editor offers a number of
tools to support productivity and collaboration. It includes 4 different tabs:

* '''Suggestions''' These are automated translation suggestions provided by
  Transifex, based on previously entered strings. Transifex also provides an
  indication of how much of a match it believes its suggestions are for the
  current string. Other users can also add suggestions, and members of your team
  can then use these, or vote on team member suggestions.

[[File:transifex-suggestions.png|thumb|600px|center|Transifex machine-generated
suggestions, based on previous translation work in the AtoM project]]

<admonition type="seealso"> Want to learn more about the automated Translation
suggestions provided by Transifex in the Suggestions tab? They call it
"Translation Memory." See: * [http://docs.transifex.com/features/tm/ Translation
Memory Introduction] *
[https://www.transifex.com/blog/2015/translation-memory-3-0/ Blog post:
Translation Memory 3.0] </admonition>

* '''History''': If previous translation work has been done on the currently
  selected string, the user name and date of the previous translations will be
  displayed in the History tab of the right-hand Collaboration panel.
* '''Glossary''': Glossary shows you any terms that have a pre-set translation.
  Thus far, we have not been using this feature in Transifex.
* '''Comments''': This allows you to collaborate with other users (across
  languages even!) and to ask for help if needed. Comments can be associated
  directly with a particular string, and posted either as a comment, or as an
  issue. Artefactual project maintainers get notifications about issues, so if
  you need further context for a string for example, feel free to comment as an
  issue (you will see the 2 options when you enter a comment - "Save", or "Save
  as issue") asking for clarification, and we will respond as soon as we can.


---------

There are other options and functions available within the Transifex Editor, but
the above should provide you with the basics. To learn more, we suggest checking
out some of the existing Transifex documentation:

* [http://docs.transifex.com/tutorials/txeditor/ Translating and reviewing
  content in the Transifex Editor]
* [http://docs.transifex.com/introduction/translators/ Getting started as a
  Translator]
* [http://docs.transifex.com/faq/#what-are-the-web-editors-auxiliary-tools FAQ:
  What are the Web Editor's Auxiliary Tools?]
* [https://youtu.be/3y0x8q3Oj7Q Getting Started with Transifex (YouTube video)]

===Receive Notifications of Updates===

One of the features Transifex provides is to allow translators to follow a
specific project (e.g., AtoM)  This feature is called "watches" in Transifex.
You can also configure several automatic notification settings for your account
- if issues or comments are filed; if another user messages you, if there are
changes in the source files for your project, etc.

'''To watch the AtoM project'''

Navigate to the AtoM project page in Transifex
(https://www.transifex.com/projects/p/atom/), and click the "Watch project"
button on the right side of the menu bar at the top of the page.

[[File:transifex-watch-project.png|thumb|700px|center|The "Watch project" button
on the AtoM project homepage in Transifex]]

You can always click this button again to stop watching the project.

'''To configure your notification settings and your watches'''

In the top right corner of the the screen, located in the dark blue header bar
at the top of the page, you will see your user name, followed by a little box
with either a check mark, or a number in it. This second box is the
notifications widget - if all notifications have been read, it will display a
checkmark; if there are unread notifications, it will display the number of
notifications to be reviewed.

If you click on the notification widget, you will be taken to the notifications
page of your user account:

[[File:transifex-notifications.png|thumb|600px|center|The notifications page in
Transifex, with the notification widget shown in the top right corner]]

On this page, you will see any activity notifications you have recieved, and the
associated date. Just above these, you will see a link called "Notification
settings." Click this to go to the Notification settings page of your account.

In the main tab, you can check or uncheck options for when you are notified (via
the email you used to register your Transifex account, and via the notifications
widget in the header bar). There is a second tab called "Watches" where you can
review and control which projects and languages you are watching.

[[File:transifex-notification-settings.png|thumb|600px|center|The notification
settings page for your user account in Transifex.]]

<admonition type="tip"> You can also get to this page by clicking on your user
name, selecting Account settings from the drop-down menu, and then choosing
"Notification settings" from the menu on the left. Note that in this area, you
can also edit your user profile, change your email or password, and manage your
connections to other accounts such as Facebook, Twitter, Github, etc - use the
Account menu links on the left of the page to explore each accounts setting
section.  </admonition>

===View project announcements===

From time to time, we'll post an announcement about the status of a project. You
can view these by going to the AtoM project homepage in Transifex
(https://www.transifex.com/projects/p/atom/), and then clicking on the
"Announcements" link in the light blue menu at the top of the page.

[[File:transifex-announcements.png|thumb|700px|center|The announcements tab of
the AtoM project in Transifex]]

<admonition type="tip"> You can configure your notification settings so you
receive an email whenever an announcement is posted. See the section above,
[[Resources/Translation#Receive_Notifications_of_Updates|Receive Notifications
of Updates]], for more information.  </admonition>

----

'''Thank you''' for helping us translate AtoM - it is through your participation
that we can make AtoM a truly international application!

Got questions, or find something that's not covered here that you think would be
helpful? Let us know via the AtoM
[https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/ica-atom-users User Forum], or send us
an email at [mailto:translate@artefactual.com translate@artefactual.com].






-----

* [[Resources|Back to Resources]]
* [[Main Page|Back to AtoM wiki home]]



[[Category:Resources]]
